This is Section VI of an incomplete multi-part project. The introduction is [here](https://github.com/SexVar/Intro).

# Section VI: Possible Causes of Greater Male Variability

Why are males more variable in cognitive abilities and many other traits, but not all traits? The explanation would have to apply only to the subset of traits in which males are more variable, or it could be a more generic explanation from which exceptions arise due to narrow, specific causes that overcome the influence of the broad tendency toward greater male variability (GMV). The available evidence is consistent with a primarily genetic basis for GMV. A primarily environmental account with regard to cognitive abilities would have to explain (1) why GMV is ubiquitous or nearly so; (2) why many mean differences have diminished or disappeared over time while associated variance differences have not; (3) why environmental influences would consistently produce more broadly distributed male scores on abilities for which there is no mean difference, a female advantage, or a male advantage; and (4) why many traits in addition to cognitive abilities exhibit GMV. The criteria would also have to be fulfilled in any account contending that the sex difference lies in systematic bias with regard to ability measurement in the tests used here. Explanations that include a test bias or environmental pressure would probably need to be piecemeal, as it is difficult to imagine a single effect from those sources that could cause variability differences in both tails. The genetic hypothesis is worth exploring further, because a plausible mechanism has been proposed. It is straightforward and can be described with limited use of jargon. The relevant body of data lacks a recent synthesis, so this section will serve to unify those literatures.

## _The X-linked hypothesis_

Humans typically have 46 chromosomes in each somatic cell nucleus, arranged in pairs because 23 are inherited from each parent. 22 pairs, the autosomes, are homologous: each gene has a counterpart on its chromosome’s partner at the same locus. The sex chromosomes (or allosomes) constitute the remaining pair. Sex chromosomes are homologous in females, who have two X chromosomes, but not in males, who have one X and one Y chromosome. X is not fully distinct from Y: some of their genes are homologous, with counterparts like autosomal genes. Mothers contribute one of their two X chromosomes to each offspring; fathers contribute their X chromosome to daughters and their Y chromosome to sons. Y is small and, aside from some X-Y homologs, it is mainly responsible for sex determination and related male characteristics (Hughes & Page, 2015). X is relatively large, so in females an epigenetic process referred to as “dosage compensation” prevents excessive transcription from their dual X chromosomes. When necessary, dosage compensation balances transcriptional output between males and females, and is accompanied by upregulation of X-linked genes so that expression from one X per cell is matched with expression from autosomal pairs (Larsson et al., 2019).

Each cell achieves dosage compensation during early embryonic development by inactivating most of one X chromosome (Balaton & Brown, 2016; Disteche, 2012, 2016; Graves, 2016; Q. Zhou et al., 2019). A maternal or paternal X chromosome is randomly silenced and the inactive state is inherited by cellular descendants, producing a mosaic of genetic expression. The effect is conspicuous in calico cats, which are nearly all female and display mosaic patches of color on their fur (Gunter, 2005; Henikoff & Greally, 2016). The coupled nature of most human genes implies that, regardless of the number of possible alleles (genetic variants), an individual’s genome contains either two copies of the same allele or two different alleles at each homologous genetic locus. For any X-linked gene subject to inactivation, females may express identical alleles (homozygous) or different alleles (heterozygous), but males express one allele (hemizygous). Any defect on a male’s X chromosome thus impedes the gene’s function in all cells, with no potential safeguard from its homolog. This is well-known for manifesting in adverse traits such as severe intellectual disability and hemophilia (Kasper & Buzin, 2009; Neri et al., 2018). Females can exhibit these unfavorable phenotypes as well, but tend to do so with milder severity (Dobyns et al., 2004; Ziats et al., 2020).

This is often portrayed as an unqualified blessing for XX females. Migeon (2014), for example, wrote “Having two X chromosomes clearly provides females with a biological advantage” (p. 10). Migeon (2014) described exceptions, but even her account is arguably incomplete. There is a direct corollary to the XX advantage: just as a detrimental allele is likely to be constrained by its counterpart on the opposite X chromosome in other cells, so is a highly advantageous allele. Variants with extreme effect will tend to be accompanied by variants of less extreme effect, so the mere presence of two X chromosomes rather than one is expected to induce a tendency of regression toward the mean. This moderating effect would occur for any heterozygous locus on the X chromosomes, relative to the same locus in a male or homozygous female. This is perhaps counterintuitive: greater inter-cellular variability leads to lesser inter-individual variability.

There are details which would mitigate the expected effect. First, some genes on the inactive X are not completely subdued, and the mechanism differs among X-linked genes that escape inactivation and lack Y homologs. In females these genes are expressed by both sex chromosomes in each cell but by only one in males. However, genes that escape inactivation have lower levels of transcription than their counterparts on the active X chromosome (Balaton et al., 2015; Tukiainen et al., 2017). So transcription still varies between cells depending on which X was inactivated, but to a lesser degree. And second, females do not always express each X chromosome in similar numbers of cells, and skewed patterns of X inactivation attenuate the moderating effect (Craig, Haworth, & Plomin, 2009). Skew can occur due to a combination of genetic abnormalities that disrupt inactivation, natural selection against cells with a particular active X, and the stochastic element of inactivation acting on a small number of precursor cells (Migeon, 2014; Wu et al., 2014). The prevalence of large departures from equal inactivation is tissue-specific. An analysis by Zito et al. (2019) expressed the degree of skewing in terms of deviation from a balance of 0.5, so 0.3 indicates parental chromosome ratios of 20:80 or 80:20. The proportion of women with degrees of skewing less than 0.3 ranged from 66% for an immune cell to 88% for subcutaneous fat. Skewness also appears to increase with age in blood-derived tissues but not in others, which contributes to the higher prevalence of skewed X inactivation in blood-derived tissues than in fat and skin (Zito et al., 2019). These findings broadly agree with results from other studies (e.g., Amos-Landgraf et al., 2006; Bolduc et al., 2008; Shvetsova et al., 2019). The distribution of X inactivation in brain tissue is not known, but these data provide an estimation. There has been some investigation into the X-linked moderating effect potential mechanism for GMV.

McClung (1918) made early speculations that the X chromosome was related to GMV, although his proposed mechanism was inaccurate and poorly defined. Fraser Roberts (1945) briefly described the X-linked hypothesis even before Lyon (1961, 1962) provided the basis for the modern understanding of X inactivation.  Childs (1965) then observed the consequences of Lyon’s model for sex differences in variability of genetic expression. Lehrke (1972, 1978, 1997) most prominently explored and advocated for the hypothesis. Invited commentaries on Lehrke’s (1972) original paper were highly critical (Anastasi, 1972; Nance & Engels, 1972), as was a review by Wittig (1976). Lehrke’s view was later endorsed by Turner and Partington (1991), and multiple commentaries on Benbow’s (1988) and Geary’s (1996) target articles on mathematical ability weighed the idea (Thomas, 1993, 1996; Vandenberg, 1988; Zohar, 1996; Zohar & Guttman, 1988). Others like Craig, Harper, and Loat (2004) recognized it as a plausible source of sex differences in variability. Johnson, Carothers, and Deary (2009) extensively discussed empirical and theoretical considerations related to the X-linked hypothesis. The X chromosome was uncontroversially accepted as a factor in higher male rates of intellectual disability, but at the time that constituted the bulk of detailed knowledge about its associations with intelligence (Butcher et al., 2008; Chiurazzi et al., 2008; Gécz et al., 2009). X-linked disorders are more easily identified than their autosomal counterparts, and Zechner et al. (2001) attempted to measure the degree of ascertainment bias by comparing intellectual disability to other classes of genetic defects. X-linked disorders were two to three times more likely to be recorded in other cases, but after applying a correction factor, they found that X-linked genes associated with intellectual disability were still overrepresented by a factor of about three. According to the most recent catalogue, the X chromosome contains about 15% of the genes currently known to be responsible for intellectual disability, despite being only about 5% of the haploid genome (Neri et al., 2018). In addition, brain tissues have very high X chromosome to autosome expression ratio in humans and other species (Nguyen & Disteche, 2006; Xiong et al., 2010).

As emphasized by two commentaries on Johnson et al. (2009), the hypothesis relies on the existence of X-linked alleles that contribute to variation throughout the normal and high ranges of cognitive abilities (Craig et al., 2009; Turkheimer & Halpern, 2009). The same admonition was given by others (Hook, 1996; Lubs, 1999; Morton, 1992; Neri & Opitz, 2000) in response to laudatory discussions of the X-linked hypothesis (Turner, 1996; Turner & Partington, 1991). An abundance of aberrant alleles known to reduce intelligence does not directly corroborate the presence of additional alleles at the same loci, or alleles at other X-linked loci, that influence variation within the normal and high ranges. This is especially true given the low density of SNPs on the X chromosome compared to the autosomes. It is formally possible that X-linked genes which affect cognitive ability exhibit variation only through uncommon alleles which are harmful relative to the major allele and account for a trifling amount of individual variance in measures of ability. Thus it may be misleading to assume that the effect of a rare, harmful allele reflects the gene’s function and population-level additive influence. The current evidence is sufficient to sweep aside this critique.

Advances in behavioral genetics have begun pinpointing genotypic markers of individual differences in intelligence. Most positions in the human genome seldom vary across individuals: the sparse exceptions with more than one common variant are called single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and these genetic differences can be used to predict phenotypic differences (A. I.?? Young et al., 2019). SNPs within a single gene can also form a larger unit for gene-based association analysis, and genes can in turn be grouped. Genetic association studies of intelligence sometimes directly search for predictors of cognitive test performance. Others use educational attainment as a proxy measure of intelligence, because it enables larger sample sizes. Multi-trait analysis can also be employed (Allegrini et al., 2019; W. D. Hill et al., 2018). Even the largest associations account for a small fraction of one percent of variance, and testing many associations demands correction to maintain a low false discovery rate. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of intelligence thus require extremely large numbers to detect significant associations with individual SNPs or genes. The aggregate variance in intelligence explained by SNPs identified in these studies has rapidly escalated from initial values of roughly 1% (Allegrini et al., 2019; Plomin & von Stumm, 2018). The largest GWAS of intelligence to date unfortunately did not assess the X chromosome (Davies et al., 2018). Savage et al.’s (2018) GWAS of intelligence did so and discovered no X-linked SNPs with genome-wide significance, although multiple X-linked genes were in all six significant gene sets. Lee and colleagues (2018) reported the largest GWAS of educational attainment to date. They used autosomal SNPs associated with educational attainment to predict 10% of variance in an independent sample’s cognitive test scores. In their separate analysis of the X chromosome, Lee et al. found numerous SNPs significantly associated with educational attainment. The genes associated with four of them — HUWE1, HS6ST2, GPC3, and CNKSR2 — are implicated in some cases of intellectual disability (Bosshard et al., 2017; Neri et al., 2018; Paganini et al., 2019; Vuillaume et al., 2018; J. Wang et al., 2019). As some postulated before GWAS (e.g., Gécz & Mulley, 2000), these data suggest that some of the genes responsible for intellectual disability also cause variation in the normal range.

An alternative to the brute force method of sampling large numbers is to concentrate on phenotypically extreme individuals, who are expected to be enriched for alleles of interest (Barnett et al., 2013; Guey et al., 2011). In order to reveal genetic associations with high intelligence, Zabaneh, Krapohl, Gaspar, and colleagues (2018) compared cohorts with extremely high intelligence and normal intelligence. No individual gene reached statistical significance (p<5×10-8), but there were two suggestive hits (p<10-5). The first was on chromosome 10 and contained all three significant SNPs, and the second, SH2D1A, was on the X chromosome. Genes in proximity to one another tend to be inherited together, and SH2D1A is close to multiple genes linked to intellectual disability that could have also caused the association (Kumar et al., 2015; Mullegama et al., 2018; Philips et al., 2014; Quintela et al., 2017; Yingjun et al., 2015). One gene family showed a significant association with high intelligence: plexins, a group of transmembrane proteins highly expressed in the central nervous system. Plexins act as receptors to semaphorins, which were the top biological pathway associated with high intelligence. There are two X-linked genes that code for plexins A3 and B3 — PLXNA3 and PLXNB3, respectively — but these genes were winnowed by quality control due to insufficient high-quality SNPs in the sample (Gaspar, personal communication). Low-quality genotyping occurs more frequently on X chromosomes than autosomes (König et al., 2014; Wise et al., 2013). The significant gene family thus contained only the seven autosomal plexin genes; nevertheless, there is independent evidence for an influence on intelligence and brain function by X-linked plexins. In a study of PLXNB3, Rujescu and colleagues (2007) found that individual differences in that gene were associated with differences in a measure of verbal intelligence and neural correlates of intelligence. Variants of PLXNA3 and PLXNB3 have been implicated in cases of mild intellectual disability in males (Athanasakis et al., 2014). The molecular functions of plexins A3 and B3 in the brain are well-characterized (Artigiani et al., 2004; Bagri et al., 2003; Ben-Zvi et al., 2008; Cheng et al., 2001; Hartwig et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2005; Low et al., 2008; Perälä et al., 2005; Riccomagno et al., 2012; Sahay et al., 2003; Q. Wang et al., 2017; Worzfeld et al., 2004, 2009; Yaron et al., 2005). In Savage et al.’s (2018) GWAS of intelligence, five of six significant gene sets contained plexin genes, including the X-linked ones, although among plexins only the gene for an autosomal plexin reached genome-wide significance. The totality of evidence suggests that X-linked and autosomal plexins are important contributors to individual differences in intelligence. Plexins are only one of many candidates that genetic association studies will continue to spotlight for biological research.

Giummo and Johnson (2012) attempted to directly test the X-linked hypothesis by comparing patterns of intelligence scores in groups of twins, but their sample was underpowered, somewhat overly restrictive, and did not include the desired genotyping of dizygotic twins. They suggested that their null results were inconclusive and that the method could be fruitfully applied to better-suited samples. Some investigators have argued that intrafamilial correlations of cognitive ability could substantiate the X-linked hypothesis if they align with prediction based on inheritance patterns of X chromosomes (McGee, 1981). For example, the correlation between fathers and sons is expected to be the lowest of all immediate kin relationships because males do not receive an X chromosome from their fathers. Sisters share either one of two X chromosomes or both, so their correlation is expected to be highest. The underlying assumptions date to Fisher (1918) and Hogben (1932). O’Connor (1943, pp. 34-38) was the first to propose a potent X-linked recessive gene for spatial ability, which was the aptitude that motivated a majority of papers on this hypothesis. Existing analyses have been highly discrepant, which may reflect either the insufficient sizes of most such samples (Schönbrodt & Perugini, 2013) and the difficulty of collecting high-quality familial data, or actual inconsistency across populations and failure to align with prediction. Many studies were conducted in the second half of the twentieth century (Abdel-Rahim et al., 1988; Ashton & Borecki, 1987; Bayley, 1966; Blatter, 1982; Boles, 1980; Bouchard & McGue, 1981; DeFries et al., 1976, 1979; Gittler & Vitouch, 1994; Kamin, 1981, p. 174; McGee, 1979, 1982; Paul, 1980; Vandenberg & Kuse, 1979; Wittig, 1976; see refs. in Thomas, 1983). The largest reserve of pertinent data has not yet been analyzed for this purpose: the more recent Generation Scotland study is a superlative source of familial data from adults (Smith et al., 2013). However, Thomas (1983) argued that the method of interpreting the order of familial correlation coefficients is incapable of decisively testing the X-linked hypothesis (cf. Loehlin, 1984). Thomas and colleagues developed other tests for the X-linked hypothesis and found support for their predictions (Thomas, 1988; Thomas & Jamison, 1981a, 1981b; Thomas & Kail, 1991). But their analyses were conducted under the obsolete assumption that a cognitive ability could be substantially mediated by one gene (Allen, Wittig, & Butler, 1981), among other dubious simplifications. Moreover, their participants were not sampled randomly. Sherman and Fennema (1978) also employed a univariate (as opposed to correlational) method and found no support for X-linkage, although this was in a sample which presented no significant sex difference in mathematical problem solving or, even more unusually, spatial visualization. The X-linked hypothesis has not been tested on human data with sound models and assumptions according to current knowledge; fresh efforts on this specific question would be needed for a definitive answer.

A study of large-scale genetic and phenotypic data offers some evidence. Because the X-linked contribution to complex traits is expected to be more variable among males, the X chromosome should contribute more to differences among males than differences among females. Using data on 20 complex traits from the UK Biobank, Sidorenko and colleagues (2019) found that X-linked SNP-based heritability was higher in males for 19 of 20 traits, including fluid intelligence. On average, it was 0.63% in males and 0.30% in females. Another approach pointed to the same conclusion: over twice as many X-linked SNPs reached genome-wide significance for these traits in males as in females. And the effect size per allele for trait-associated alleles was larger in males (regardless of whether they were significantly associated in females, males, or the total group). These large sex differences did not extend to the autosomes, as expected from other research.

There is a further method which has the advantage of measuring an effect that varies in direction across groups of species, rather than attempting to detect tiny statistical effects within humans. Sex determination systems vary wildly across species, and some other animals use genotypic sex determination but different sex chromosomes. Comparative data from animals with other heteromorphic sex chromosomes can probe the mechanism asserted by the X-linked hypothesis. In the ZW system — used by most snakes, birds, and butterflies, among others — the Z chromosome is larger and common to both sexes, as is the X chromosome in the XY system (Augstenová et al., 2018; Bachtrog et al., 2014; Blackmon et al., 2017). One difference is crucial for this study: in the XY system, males have distinct sex chromosomes, making them the heterogametic sex (XY) and females the homogametic sex (XX). But in the ZW system, males are homogametic (ZZ) and females are heterogametic (ZW). Although ZW dosage compensation diverges from a close analogy to that of the XY system — and the extent of dosage compensation is more variable (Graves, 2016; Gu & Walters, 2017) — the moderating effect of heterozygosity is expected to act on males in ZW species. Thus, the X-linked hypothesis in humans suggests a cross-species prediction: traits linked to sex chromosomes should tend to exhibit more phenotypic variability in the heterogametic sex. Cognitive ability is not a candidate for cross-species comparison, but accurate measurements can be made of body size. Reinhold and Engqvist (2013) meta-analyzed data on body size across four animal taxa: birds and butterflies, which have heterogametic females, and mammals and insects with heterogametic males. Butterflies and birds showed greater female variability in body size, and mammals and insects showed greater male variability. Their results are excellent evidence for larger variability in the heterogametic sex, although they do not directly prove an X-linked contribution to greater male variability in human intelligence. Because the heterogametic sex was more variable regardless of which sex it was, the results are inconsistent with explanations that rely primarily on sexual selection (Archer & Mehdikhani, 2003; Trofimova, 2015).
